README.md, before:

_This is a fork of https://github.com/xd009642/xd-tts which has been modified
to use [RTen](https://github.com/robertknight/rten) instead of ONNX Runtime
for inference_.

# Rustnation 2024 TTS in Rust

This is the project repository for my 2024 Rustnation talk _Creating a
Text-To-Speech System in Rust_. Here you can find the main TTS engine, slides
and a collection of useful scripts and resources. Check out each modules
documentation for more content I didn't have time to discuss in the talk!

For the other projects mentioned look no further:

* [ssml-parser](https://github.com/emotechlab/ssml-parser)
* [griffin-lim](https://github.com/emotechlab/griffin-lim)

## Getting Started

This repo uses [git-lfs](https://git-lfs.com/) to store the neural networks,
make sure this is setup before
cloning or things may not work as expected.

There are two binaries in the project, one to prepare/analyse training data and
another to run the TTS

For mac users you may want to refer to [this issue](https://github.com/rust-ndarray/ndarray/issues/1197) 
for getting cBlas working. You will also have to open the onnxruntime dylib
in Finder to allow you to bypass Gatekeeper checks for the file as it isn't 
signed.

## Other folders

### Slides

The presentation slides! These are done using [typst](https://typst.app/).

### Scripts

Scripts here are mainly for some dataset cleaning, and plotting scripts to
generate images for the slides. There's also a folder inside called
speedyspeech for an old and largely abandoned part of the project.

### Resources

In the resources folder I've added a custom dictionary, this includes
tokens in the LJ Speech corpus which aren't present in CMU Dict. For this I've
used the `data_cleaning.py` script in scripts and the gruut grapheme-to-phoneme
(g2p) models. If I'd had time to do my own g2p this would have also been pure
Rust.

For `data_cleaning.py` you will need to download the librispeech lexicon
[here](https://openslr.trmal.net/resources/11/librispeech-lexicon.txt)


## Old Bits and Bobs

### SpeedySpeech

There is also disabled support for loading a pre-trained speedy speech model
where we load it via candle/torch/tract. Unfortunately, due to ONNX support
outside of ORT this ended up being abandoned. But the code should work for other
ONNX models, or JIT traced torch models which work better for those
dependencies. 

Unfortunately, I can't pretend any of it is useful, but for someone considering
using any of those crates these modules can be a pointer on how to start using
them. I've also added a vast array of doc comments explaining some of the
conversion process and difficulties I faced.

## References

* [Tacotron2 Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05884)
* [netron.app - an ONNX viewer](https://netron.app/)
* [ssml-parser](https://github.com/emotechlab/ssml-parser)
* [griffin-lim](https://github.com/emotechlab/griffin-lim)
* [speech.zone - great for learning about speech AI](https://speech.zone/)
* [ONNX graph surgeon](https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT/tree/master/tools/onnx-graphsurgeon)
* [typst](https://typst.app/)

Commit message:

Add note about converting models to .rten format

README.md, after:

_This is a fork of https://github.com/xd009642/xd-tts which has been modified
to use [RTen](https://github.com/robertknight/rten) instead of ONNX Runtime
for inference_.

_To run this you will need to first use the [`rten-convert`](https://pypi.org/project/rten-convert/) tool on the models in the `models/` directory to generate `.rten`-format models_:

```
pip install rten-convert
rten-convert models/tacotron2/encoder.onnx
rten-convert models/tacotron2/decoder_iter.onnx
rten-convert models/tacotron2/postnet.onnx
```

# Rustnation 2024 TTS in Rust

This is the project repository for my 2024 Rustnation talk _Creating a
Text-To-Speech System in Rust_. Here you can find the main TTS engine, slides
and a collection of useful scripts and resources. Check out each modules
documentation for more content I didn't have time to discuss in the talk!

For the other projects mentioned look no further:

* [ssml-parser](https://github.com/emotechlab/ssml-parser)
* [griffin-lim](https://github.com/emotechlab/griffin-lim)

## Getting Started

This repo uses [git-lfs](https://git-lfs.com/) to store the neural networks,
make sure this is setup before
cloning or things may not work as expected.

There are two binaries in the project, one to prepare/analyse training data and
another to run the TTS

For mac users you may want to refer to [this issue](https://github.com/rust-ndarray/ndarray/issues/1197) 
for getting cBlas working. You will also have to open the onnxruntime dylib
in Finder to allow you to bypass Gatekeeper checks for the file as it isn't 
signed.

## Other folders

### Slides

The presentation slides! These are done using [typst](https://typst.app/).

### Scripts

Scripts here are mainly for some dataset cleaning, and plotting scripts to
generate images for the slides. There's also a folder inside called
speedyspeech for an old and largely abandoned part of the project.

### Resources

In the resources folder I've added a custom dictionary, this includes
tokens in the LJ Speech corpus which aren't present in CMU Dict. For this I've
used the `data_cleaning.py` script in scripts and the gruut grapheme-to-phoneme
(g2p) models. If I'd had time to do my own g2p this would have also been pure
Rust.

For `data_cleaning.py` you will need to download the librispeech lexicon
[here](https://openslr.trmal.net/resources/11/librispeech-lexicon.txt)


## Old Bits and Bobs

### SpeedySpeech

There is also disabled support for loading a pre-trained speedy speech model
where we load it via candle/torch/tract. Unfortunately, due to ONNX support
outside of ORT this ended up being abandoned. But the code should work for other
ONNX models, or JIT traced torch models which work better for those
dependencies. 

Unfortunately, I can't pretend any of it is useful, but for someone considering
using any of those crates these modules can be a pointer on how to start using
them. I've also added a vast array of doc comments explaining some of the
conversion process and difficulties I faced.

## References

* [Tacotron2 Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05884)
* [netron.app - an ONNX viewer](https://netron.app/)
* [ssml-parser](https://github.com/emotechlab/ssml-parser)
* [griffin-lim](https://github.com/emotechlab/griffin-lim)
* [speech.zone - great for learning about speech AI](https://speech.zone/)
* [ONNX graph surgeon](https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT/tree/master/tools/onnx-graphsurgeon)
* [typst](https://typst.app/)
